1. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2019 Mar;39(2):66-85. doi: 10.1111/opo.12607.

The prevalence and diagnosis of 'stereoblindness' in adults less than 60 years
of age: a best evidence synthesis.

Chopin A(1)(2), Bavelier D(1)(2), Levi DM(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculte de Psychologie et Sciences de l'Education, University of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Campus Biotech, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)School of Optometry, University of California, Berkeley, USA.

PURPOSE: Stereoscopic vision (or stereopsis) is the ability to perceive depth
from binocular disparity - the difference of viewpoints between the two eyes.
Interestingly, there are large individual differences as to how well one can
appreciate depth from such a cue. The total absence of stereoscopic vision,
called 'stereoblindness', has been associated with negative behavioural outcomes
such as poor distance estimation. Surprisingly, the prevalence of
stereoblindness remains unclear, as it appears highly dependent on the way in
which stereopsis is measured.
RECENT FINDINGS: This review highlights the fact that stereopsis is not a
unitary construct, but rather implies different systems. The optimal conditions
for measuring these varieties of stereoscopic information processing are
discussed given the goal of detecting stereoblindness, using either
psychophysical or clinical stereotests. In that light, we then discuss the
estimates of stereoblindness prevalence of past studies.
SUMMARY: We identify four different approaches that all converge toward a
prevalence of stereoblindness of 7% (median approach: 7%;
unambiguous-stereoblindness-criteria approach: 7%; visual-defect-included
approach: 7%; multiple-criteria approach: 7%). We note that these estimates were
derived considering adults of age <60 years old. Older adults may have a higher
prevalence. Finally, we make recommendations for a new ecological definition of
stereoblindness and for efficient clinical methods for determining
stereoblindness by adapting existing tools.

© 2019 The Authors Ophthalmic & Physiological Optics © 2019 The College of
Optometrists.

DOI: 10.1111/opo.12607
PMID: 30776852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
