Final publication is copyrighted by and available from Mary Ann Liebert,
Inc., publishers http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/aut.2018.0020
To cite this article:
Dora M. Raymaker, Steven K. Kapp, Katherine E. McDonald, Michael
Weiner, Elesia Ashkenazy, and Christina Nicolaidis.Autism in Adulthood.
http://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2018.0020
Title: Development of the AASPIRE Web Accessibility Guidelines for Autistic Web Users
Author Names and Affiliations: Dora M. Raymaker, PhD1,2 (draymake@pdx.edu, 503.725.9629),
Steven K. Kapp, PhD2,3 (steven.kapp@gmail.com, +44 7491.934037), Katherine E. McDonald,
PhD2,4 (kemcdona@syr.edu, 315.443.5313), Michael Weiner, MD, MPH2,5 (mw@cogit.net, 317274-9026), Elesia Ashkenazy, BA2 (elesia.ashkenaz@gmail.com, 718.208.3435), Christina
Nicolaidis, MD, MPH1,2,6 (nicol22@pdx.edu, 503.725.9603)
1

Regional Research Institute, School of Social Work, Portland State University, Portland, Oregon

2

Academic Autism Spectrum Partnership in Research and Education, Portland State University,
Portland, Oregon
3

College of Social Sciences and International Studies, Sociology, Philosophy, and Anthropology,
University of Exeter, United Kingdom
4

Public Health, Food Studies, and Nutrition, David B. Balk College of Sport and Human
Dynamics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York
5

Regenstrief Institute, Inc., Indiana University Center for Health Services and Outcomes
Research, Center for Health Information and Communication, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, Health Services Research and Development Service CIN
13-416, Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
6

Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon

Running title: AASPIRE Web Accessibility Guidelines
Corresponding Author: Dora M. Raymaker, 1600 SW 4th Avenue, Suite 900, Portland OR 97201,
draymake@pdx.edu, 503.725.9629
Keywords: autism, web accessibility, web accessibility guidelines, community based
participatory research


Authorship Confirmation Statement
All authors contributed to all stages of the research described in this article as full AASPIRE
partners. Dora M. Raymaker, Steven K. Kapp, and Elesia Ashkenazy contributed as autistic
community partners, with Raymaker and Kapp also contributing academic expertise in
accessibility and autism and the internet, and Ashkenazy contributing written content for the
website. Further, Raymaker was the lead engineer and technical writer for the website.
Christina Nicolaidis was the Principal Investigator for the study, and served as a senior mentor
throughout. She is both a family member to an autistic person and a health care provider.
Katherine E. McDonald and Michael Weiner (also a healthcare provider) served as academic
partners, providing expertise in disability accessibility and web-based bioinformatics. On this
paper, Raymaker took the lead role in organizing the data, creating the first full draft, and
revising subsequent drafts. All authors reviewed the initial draft and revisions, contributed
additional ideas and content, and approved the final version prior to submission. Earlier
versions of this work were included as part of Dr. Raymaker’s PhD dissertation. This manuscript
has been submitted solely to this journal and is not published elsewhere.
Author Disclosure Statements
Dora M. Raymaker, PhD - No competing financial interests exist.
Steven Kapp, PhD - No competing financial interests exist.
Katherine E. McDonald, PhD - No competing financial interests exist.
Michael Weiner, MD - No competing financial interests exist.
Elesia Ashkenazy, BA - No competing financial interests exist.
Christina Nicolaidis, MD, MPH - No competing financial interests exist.


Abstract
Websites figure predominantly in everyday life. However, many websites remain inaccessible to
autistic people, and existing efforts to improve accessibility are in early stages, do not directly
include autistic users in their development, or have not been empirically evaluated. The
Academic Autism Spectrum Partnership in Research and Education (AASPIRE) used a
community based participatory research approach to create a website to improve healthcare
access for autistic adults. We used the creation of that website as a "living laboratory" to
develop the AASPIRE Web Accessibility Guidelines for Autistic Users. Our guidelines are
grounded in accessibility theory, had autistic end-user involvement at all stages, and was
empirically evaluated through a usability study and evaluation surveys. We incorporated what
we learned into the design of the website, and compiled the accessibility information into a set
of guidelines. The guidelines offer recommendations for increasing the physical, intellectual,
and social acceptability of websites for use by autistic adults. In the evaluation of the website
by 170 autistic end users, nearly all indicated it was easy to use (97%), easy to understand
(95%), important (97%), and useful (96%). Ninety-two percent would recommend it to a friend,
and 95% would recommend it to a healthcare provider. There were no significant associations
between usability or understandability and education level, receipt of help using the site,
browser type (e.g., IE, Safari), or device type (e.g. PC, tablet). We recommend using the
guidelines to improve website accessibility for autistic internet users.


Background
Internet Accessibility and Autism
The internet, including the World Wide Web, is woven into the fabric of life in much of the
world, and is instrumental in activities such as finding employment and housing, managing bank
accounts, navigating maps, accessing health systems and health information, and staying
informed about local and world events. Web accessibility for autistic users may be especially
important, as a large number of them likely use the internet,1-3 and the Autistic community has
developed largely through web-based interaction.4,5 The internet has been called "to autistic
people what [American Sign Language] is to the deaf."6 Indeed, a recent online survey reported
that the internet helped autistic people communicate more than it helped non-autistic people
because of its textual basis, provisioning of time to think, unique opportunities for practicing
social interaction (including control of which people with whom to interact, and control of
communication media), facilitation of meeting similar people, and expression of one's true
self.7 However, uneven attention has been paid in existing guidelines to the specific web
accessibility needs of people on the autism spectrum, which may be different from the needs of
people with other types of disabilities.
Web accessibility refers, broadly, to making the web accessible to all, including people with a
variety of disabilities, or functional limitations. Multiple policy guidelines, such as Section 508 of
the US Rehabilitation Act 8 and the United Nations Web Accessibility Mandate,9 support
individuals’ rights to accessible web-based information. The international body responsible for
setting the technical standards on which the web operates—the World Wide Web
Consortium—includes the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI),10 which developed and maintains
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG). The WCAG provides a set of technical
standards to address concerns of interface detection, control, comprehension, and crossplatform sustainability, which are broadly implemented throughout today’s web. Most web
accessibility features are cost-effective and simple to implement,11 particularly if implemented
from the outset. However, major accessibility standards such as the WCAG were largely created
by and for individuals with physical and sensory (i.e., vision and hearing) disabilities, not by
individuals with other sensory processing, communication, or cognitive disabilities, such as
many people on the autism spectrum. Aware of this, the WAI convened a Cognitive and
Learning Disabilities Task Force,12 to provide guidance around cognitive accessibility; however
current work remains in preliminary stages,13 and it is unclear if any of the individuals on the
task force are autistic.
Involving autistic people in developing web accessibility guidelines matters because of the great
need for end-user engagement in both the creation of accessible websites,14-21 and in disabilityrelated research.22-25 Individuals who do not have a particular disability lack the first-hand
experience that provides important insight into understanding effective access strategies for
those who do, or even which functional limitations need to be accommodated.26,27 While
laudable, the idea of “universal design” (accessibility features that work for everyone) is
ultimately impractical due to the fact that access needs can conflict with each other. For


example, some guidelines intended for people with intellectual disability17,19,20 recommend
simplifying vocabulary, which—if implemented without retaining the precision afforded by
more complex wording—can make language pragmatics more difficult for autistic users to
understand.28,29 Likewise, high-contrast color schemes suitable for people with low vision may
be painful or unreadable to autistic users with hypersensitive vision.
Internet spaces made by and for autistic users may incorporate accessibility features naturally;
however, there is little guidance for developers of websites, including those who may want to
take advantage of some autistic people’s affinity for the internet, to develop resources for
autistic adults. Clear guidelines, informed by autistic end users and developed through a
systematic process, are needed.
Our aim was to use a community-based participatory research (CBPR) approach to create a set
of guidelines for developing accessible web sites targeting autistic web users. We created these
guidelines from lessons learned during the development and evaluation a website focused on
healthcare for autistic adults.
AASPIRE and the AASPIRE Healthcare Toolkit Project Context
The Academic Autism Spectrum Partnership in Research and Education (AASPIRE) is a long-term
CBPR collaboration comprised of autistic adults, academic researchers, and other stakeholders.
In this article, we describe several accessibility lessons learned during a three-year study to
create and test an interactive, web-based toolkit for improving healthcare access and quality
for autistic adults in the US.30 During the study we solicited feedback about web accessibility
from autistic participants and from our own CBPR team, which consists mostly of autistic adults.
After the research was completed, we compiled the accessibility lessons into the AASPIRE Web
Accessibility Guidelines presented in this article. The full details of the research project (the
AASPIRE Healthcare Toolkit project) are reported in-depth elsewhere.30-32 However, it is
important to understand the context of the research project, since we used it as the “living
laboratory” in which to develop and validate the accessibility features that we then compiled
into the guidelines.
The three-year research project consisted of four study components that are described in
varying detail in this paper. Two study components primarily informed the accessibility features
used on the website: 1) qualitative interviews with autistic adults about their healthcare
experiences and ideas for interactive online healthcare tools;31 and 2) a series of studies to
develop, refine, and test an accessible online survey tool that is used as part of the
website.30,33,34 The other two study components verified and evaluated our accessibility
features: 1) a usability study of the initial (alpha) version of the web site; and 2) an evaluation of
the revised (beta) version of the website. The results of the interview and survey tool
components are summarized where relevant; the results of the usability study and the
evaluation study are presented here in greater detail.


The AASPIRE Healthcare Toolkit consists of an informational website and an interactive report
generator, called the Autism Healthcare Accommodations Tool (AHAT). The AHAT uses the
accessible online survey tool to collect information and then generates a customized healthcare
accommodations report for healthcare providers and their staff. The intended audience for the
site is autistic adults, people who support them in healthcare, and healthcare providers. The
toolkit can be found at <https://autismandhealth.org/>. See Figure 1 for a map of the full
project.
Study components primarily to inform website accessibility features

qualitative interviews about
healthcare experiences &
interactive website ideas

studies to develop & refine an
accessible online survey tool,
including our preliminary evaluation

AASPIRE Healthcare
Toolkit Product
(interactive website)

AASPIRE Healthcare Toolkit Project
“living laboratory” for understanding
web accessibility for autistic users

alpha website
usability study*

AASPIRE Web
Accessibility
Guideline*

beta website
evaluation
study*
*primary focus of this paper

Study components primarily to evaluate website accessibility features

Theoretical Foundation
We compiled what we learned from our work in the “living laboratory” of the AASPIRE
Healthcare Toolkit project into the AASPIRE Web Accessibility Guidelines, using existing theory
and established principles of web accessibility. As a theoretical foundation, we used the
"information worlds" model provided by Jaeger and Bernett.11 The model defines three
dimensions of information access: physical, intellectual, and social. Physical accessibility has
received the most focus on the Web;11 examples include image descriptions, forms that are
navigable by keyboard, user-controlled font sizes, and other accommodations for sensory
disabilities. An example of intellectual (i.e., cognitive) accessibility is translating prose into a
simpler and less abstract vocabulary. Examples of social accessibility would be content that
explicitly spells out language pragmatics, or content that takes social or cultural context into
account; for example, avoiding the use of the jigsaw-puzzle symbol for autism because in
Autistic and neurodiversity culture, this symbol is considered dehumanizing.35,36
As guiding principles for physical accessibility, we used the principles of the WCAG, the most
widely-used Web accessibility standard: sites must be perceivable (can users make it out?),
operable (can it be controlled?), understandable (can it be comprehended?), and robust (can it
run on current and likely future technologies?).37,38 As guiding principles for intellectual and


social accessibility, we used the principles of the plain language movement. Plain language is
defined behaviorally by the Center for Plain Language: "Can the people who are the audience
for the material quickly and easily find what they need, understand what they find, [and] act
appropriately on that understanding." 39
Methods to Create the Guidelines
CBPR Process
AASPIRE uses a CBPR approach, with autistic adults and academic scientists (not necessarily
mutually exclusive roles) contributing equitably to the work.40,41 We have been working
together for over a decade, and meet and make decisions together through text-based chat,
selective in-person meetings, and a group mailing list.42,43 Throughout the project, adult autistic
web users on our team led accessibility discussions and provided solutions. Figure 2
summarizes the iterative developmental process. The figure shows the nature of involvement
by autistic people at each stage: on our CBPR team, as research participants, or by Autistic staff;
the lead web developer and technical writer, and first author of this paper, is Autistic. This
section describes our process for generating, and then verifying, our accessibility solutions.
ideas from QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS ABOUT HEALTHCARE
EXPERIENCES & INTERACTIVE WEBSITE IDEAS

1. Website
Content

2. Website User
Interface

3. Interactive
Survey Tool

STAFF: content outline and
information architecture

STAFF: mockups of possible user
interfaces

PRIOR STUDIES: develop the
ACASI accessible survey tool

CBPR TEAM: feedback on content
and information architecture

CBPR TEAM: feedback on
interface mockups

STAFF: first draft of content and
information architecture

STAFF: website user interface
implementation

CBPR TEAM: create interactive
survey for website / refine tool

RESEARCH STUDY: interactive
survey tool preliminary evaluation

4. alpha Website
CBPR team review and feedback
of fully implemented website
RESEARCH STUDY: usability
study on website
STAFF: website revisions based on
usability study

5. Beta Website
RESEARCH STUDY: toolkit
evaluation study

KEY
Italic - autistic involvement by research participants
Underlined - autistic involvement by research team
Neither - autistic involvement by staﬀ only


1. Website Content
The website development began by reviewing information from our qualitative interviews on
the experiences of autistic adults in healthcare,31 as well as our team’s ideas for what might be
helpful to them or to other autistic people. Staff compiled those ideas into an outline of content
to include and presented it to the full team for further development.
Accessibility discussions focused on making the content intellectually and socially accessible.
Qualitative study participants and research team members noted significant problems with
existing websites and descriptions of medical practice, and offered recommendations for
overcoming them. Examples are not assuming that patients can use the telephone to make
appointments, attending to sensory and organizational challenges related to exercise, and
addressing how to make a change in diet when someone else, such as a care provider, is in
charge of one’s food. We discussed whether to include a potentially controversial section on
therapy, which autistic people have found both a source of increased quality of life and a
source of harm or oppression.44-46 We decided that we would be able to present therapy in a
way that was socially accessible by drawing on the expertise of the autistic members of the
team.
In creating the full draft of the content, staff writers implemented WCAG and plain-language
principles, and drew on our autistic partner’s expertise. We wrote at an eighth-grade reading
level, used specific and precise language, and avoided idioms, minimized length, and used a
FAQ-formatted information architecture. More explanation of social context was added than
would be for other audiences, such as through inclusion of interaction scripts (e.g., for making
an appointment, requesting accommodations from a healthcare provider, or asking for a
referral for a diagnosis).
Staff provided the draft to the full team for review and additional accessibility checks. Autistic
team members highlighted the following additional accessibility points and examples, for
intellectual and social accessibility.
•

Content modifications based on lived experience: knowing it’s possible to be evaluated
for autism even if no one is available to give an early childhood report, information
about free clinics, and explaining why healthcare providers might be antagonistic
towards accommodation requests

•

Clarifications of ambiguities: how to communicate medicine dosages if more than one is
listed on the label, acceptability of leaving blanks on intake forms, prefacing
recommendations with "not all of these items may apply to you"

•

Enhanced precision of language: specifying “call or email” instead of "contact,” defining
"healthcare providers," providing examples for open-ended recommendations
("advocate for accommodations in the waiting room--adjust the music, lights, etc.")


•

Clarifications due to community-specific context: clarifying special diet as "diabetic diet"
or "low-salt diet" (not a "cure-autism" diet), changing "wait in my car" to "wait outside"
so as not to presume the person has a car

•

Recommendations for restructuring text to reduce length or increase clarity: removing
non-essential items from a long list, referencing repeated information in a single
separate section instead of pasting it repeatedly

•

Simplifying language or reducing reading level through multiple wording changes

2. Website User Interface
Simultaneously with the content development, staff created mock-ups of how the website
might look. Because the lead developer was autistic, accessibility features were built into the
mock-ups, including using a low-contrast color theme, an accessible sans-serif font, and visual
simplicity including plain, flat backgrounds.
In discussion, the team came to consensus on preferred layout quickly; however, the color
palette was more difficult. Team members expressed divergent preferences and noted that the
"wrong" palette could lead to eye strain, migraines, and an inability to read the text. Further,
while a low-contrast palette is an accessibility need for many autistic people, it presents a
barrier to accessibility for individuals with low vision. We decided to create multiple color
themes—users could choose based on preference—including two high-contrast themes that
met the WCAG guidelines for contrast ratio,10 with a default palette similar to that of the
AASPIRE website, which has a low-contrast purple and tan theme that everyone on the team
liked. Having multiple color options has provided unusual benefits to autistic people, such as
reading words and facial expressions.47,48
Staff created the website from the selected mockup, implementing user-controlled font sizes
and color themes, including a “theme” with no formatting at all; a simple and clutter-free
interface; predictable navigation and layout; and use of simple but meaningful icons to
delineate and organize content areas and topics. The full team then reviewed the working
website and made the following further accessibility comments and requests.
For intellectual accessibility:
•

Decreasing clutter: remove or visually tone down horizontal lines as separators, increase
use of white space

•

Reducing scrolling: make all navigation and key page elements visible in a typically-sized
browser window

•

Increasing predictability: position similar elements in the same place on various pages,
add “breadcrumbs” (indicators of location in a hierarchical structure) even for shallow
navigation trees.


•

Reinforcing information architecture with icons: increase usage of icons, because they
provide redundancy with the nature of the content, and make it easy to understand
how the content is structured

For social accessibility:
•

Increasing explicitness: use words on the home page to make it very clear what the site
is about and why someone might use it; replace "change skin" with "change theme";
make key areas, such as the entry point for the AHAT, more distinct

•

Replacing icons with unwanted symbolism: butterfly held too many pre-existing
connotations within the Autistic community, lightning bolt communicated aggression

For physical accessibility:
•

Adding colors: provide alternatives, including a theme with a dark background and a
theme with a light background, for both the low- and high-contrast palettes

3. Interactive Survey Tool
The interactive survey tool generates a customized accommodations report for healthcare
providers based on how a user completes a web-based form. It was built on Portland State
University’s Audio Computer Assisted Self Interview (ACASI) platform, a web-based survey tool
previously developed in partnership with individuals with a wide range of disabilities, including
autistic people. It incorporates several accessibility features,33,34 including read-aloud (feedback
from participants was that the inflection of human-recorded speech, not computer-generated,
is what enabled them to understand the information), user-controlled font sizes, consistent and
clutter-free navigation, the capacity to play American Sign Language translations of text, and
screen reader optimization. A detailed description of the ACASI software can be found
elsewhere.34
AASPIRE team members liked the neutral colors and the existing accessibility features, and no
one had difficulty using the survey. They identified accessibility barriers as 1) the inability to go
back to previous pages; 2) dependence on Flash (an online application that was popular at the
time) for the non-screen reader version, which limited compatibility with some platforms and
with assistive technology; and 3) lack of alternative color schemes. We added a “back” button
and addressed the Flash issues by rebuilding the platform in HTML5, and merging the screen
reader and main versions. We deferred providing alternative color schemes for a future version.
We configured the tool to work with our application, and made the accessibility changes
recommended by the group. We then conducted a brief preliminary evaluation of just the tool
with autistic participants and supporters; it included a cognitive interview of the survey items,
and a short questionnaire about perceived usability, accessibility, and acceptability. Details are
available elsewhere;30 here, we summarize findings relevant to the website accessibility.


Regarding intellectual and social accessibility, participants were able to paraphrase survey
content, and the overwhelming majority said the material was easy to understand. Qualitative
suggestions for improving the user interface included the issues identified by our team. They
also included: 1) clarifying the reason for open-ended items; 2) adding a “not sure” or “N/A”
option to reduce anxiety about not being able to answer exactly; 3) allowing people to write in
their own answers instead of selecting from the checklists; and 4) correcting a confusing
combination of a checkbox and a narrative-text (write-in) field. Participants noted the need to
reduce the font sizes to display more text per page, and to minimize scrolling. We made all of
these changes except allowing people to provide narrative responses, because this would have
interfered with core aspects of the intervention. This both confirmed that the accessibility
features of the survey tool were otherwise working, and provided some additional information
about desirable features to be added.
4. Alpha Website Usability Testing
Methods
Staff implemented all accessibility changes, and put the full toolkit together. We then
conducted a usability study49 of the site. We recruited participants through community
connections in the Portland, Oregon Metro area. Participants needed to be live in the Portland,
Oregon metro area as the study was administered in person, and be at least 18 years of age.
They also had to be one of the three intended audiences for the website, defined as meeting
one of the following criteria: 1) be diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD); 2)
support someone who has been diagnosed with an ASD; or 3) be a primary care provider. These
three populations are the audiences for the web site. Additionally, participants were
purposefully selected to represent a range of comfort with internet technology, a range of
educational levels, and multiple target use cases (task-oriented, exploratory, and proxy--using
the site on behalf of a family member or client).
We followed a typical protocol for software usability testing,49 where participants were asked
to complete a series of tasks involving the website functionality while the first author observed,
asked follow-up questions, and recorded the results. Data recorded on the tasks were 1)
whether it could be completed; 2) how long it took to complete; 3) observations (e.g., of what
the participant was doing with their mouse); and 4) participant comments. Tasks covered basic
web functionality (e.g., search, navigation), accessibility functions (e.g., color theme switching,
font size control), and functionality specific to the Toolkit (e.g., downloading content for offline
use,).
The first author met with participants in person. With the exception of one healthcare provider,
the study was conducted in the same location with the same equipment. Where there
appeared to be a usability problem, the first author probed participants for ideas for why the
problem might exist, and what might fix it. The first author placed both verbal information (e.g.,
participant comments about locating a link) and behavior from participants (e.g., whether their
mouse pointer found the link quickly) into a series of matrices to assess usability issues, and


prioritized the issues based on severity (to what degree did it affect the person’s ability to find
and make use of the data) and pervasiveness (how many people had the same experience).49
During the process, the first author referred to observational field notes and participant
comments to gain a more in-depth understanding of issues, and relied on their experience as a
programmer to make decisions about what to address from the aggregate issues matrix based
on severity ranking and the level of effort to correct the issue. The full team then met to discuss
the findings.
Results
Eight people participated: three autistic, three supporter, and two primary care providers. This
is a typical and sufficient number of participants for a usability study50. They were aged 18 to 50
years, and were diverse in observed technical ability and self-reported education (Table 1).
Although all participants were able to complete the tasks, they did identify several usability
issues, which are summarized in Table 2. The issues of highest priority were a consequence of
the forms and worksheets displaying as the default page after entering the patient or provider
side from the home page, and lack of clear labeling for the topic and outline navigation. These
issues were remedied by defaulting to a topic summary page and adding headers. The usability
issues were not specific to any one user group; in cases where an issue was reported by more
than one person, those individuals spanned multiple stakeholder groups. This was important to
us, since all three audiences would be using the site. It also made it clear that the issues were
general user interface problems, not accessibility problems.
Participants were encouraged to "think out loud" as they performed the usability tasks. Several
participants noted the accessibility features of the site during their dialogue. Autistic
participants said that they appreciated the ability to change colors ("because some people may
have a harder time seeing one... not many sites I know do that"); appreciated the icons and the
simple, predictable navigation ("I like how you can go back to top from any place so you don't
get lost"); the lack of clutter ("calming not to have the splashings and the fancies"); and the
highly structured information architecture and FAQ-formatted content ("clear, categorical
information in an accessible format is great and sorely needed. Most sites present information
in the form of vague statements instead of a question...this is an intuitive web site...it's in
question form so I know where to go"). The results of the usability study help verify that we
were able to create an accessible website by drawing on the expertise of the autistic people on
our research team.
Staff revised the web site to address the issues identified during the usability testing. We used
the resulting beta site in the Beta Website Evaluation, described next.
5. Beta Website Evaluation
Methods
We conducted an evaluation of the AASPIRE Healthcare Toolkit to determine its feasibility and
acceptability as an intervention to improve healthcare for autistic adults. Details of that study


can be found elsewhere.30 Here, we describe the results of the subset of evaluation items
related to the usability and accessibility.
Our sample included U.S. residents age 18 or older who also met at least one of the following
criteria: 1) diagnosed with an ASD, and/or 2) providing support to an individual diagnosed with
an ASD who would not be able to participate in the study themselves, even with
accommodations and supports. We recruited a convenience sample of participants through
word of mouth and our networks, including community electronic mailing lists, local
developmental disabilities agencies, and social media. We also recruited via broader online
recruitment channels including the Interactive Autism Network <https:// iancommunity.org/>
and several general online study recruitment boards.
Participants took a pre-usage survey which then directed them to the beta website. One month
later, we sent participants a link to a post-usage survey that included the evaluation questions
about the website. Multiple-choice questions on the post-usage survey asked how easy the
website was to use and understand, how important and useful the information was, and
whether participants would recommend it to friends or primary care providers. Open-ended
items solicited information about what the participant liked most and least about the website,
what they thought was most useful, and recommendations for how to improve the website.
We analyzed quantitative data using Stata 11 (College Station, Texas)51. The primary analysis
consisted of summary statistics for the combined patient and supporter populations. We
conducted a secondary analysis using chi-squared tests for association between evaluation
variables and the population, education level, and browser and device type used. We
summarized the recommendations provided in the open-ended items.
Results
Demographics from the 170 participants are in Table 3. They represented a diverse range of age
(18-63), gender (54% female, 44% male, 2% other), educational attainment (19% high school or
less, 25% some college, 37% undergraduate degree, 18% graduate degree), and support needs
(63% needed support always or often to receive healthcare). Most participants accessed the
site through a desktop or laptop computer, and in a Google Chrome or Mozilla FireFox browser.
Nearly all participants found the toolkit easy to use (97% N=120 very easy or somewhat easy)
and easy to understand (95% N=117 all or most of the site). Most indicated that the
information was important (63% N=79 very important, 34% N=42 kind of important). Most
indicated that the information was useful (53% N=63 very useful, 43% N=53 somewhat useful).
Ninety-two percent (N=105) would recommend the toolkit to a friend, and 95% (N=111) would
recommend it to a healthcare provider.30 In t-tests for association, no significant associations
were found between usability or understandability and education level, receipt of help using
the site, browser type, or device type.
Qualitative comments related to access and usability were minimal. The most frequent
recommendation was alternative color schemes on the survey tool, confirming what we already
believed. A few participants felt that the survey tool’s user interface was too cluttered, possibly


due to some items having a large number of possible options; this was addressed by the use of
formatting in a subsequent release. Some participants noted the accessibility and usability as
what they appreciated about the site: "the questions aren't vague, and they are easy to
understand," "it was easy to navigate and it was free," "very well organized and easy to use."
Based on these evaluation data, we feel that the features that we identified throughout our
processes created a highly accessible website for a population of autistic users with a diverse
range of age, gender, education, and support needs.
The public release of the toolkit can be found at <https://autismandhealth.org>. Future
releases will add user-controlled color themes to the survey tool user interface.
AASPIRE Web Accessibility Guidelines
These guidelines are a summary of the accessibility features we identified and implemented
during the course of our work. None of these items were difficult or expensive for us to
implement. They did not require special expertise beyond basic web programming and
technical communications skills. We recommend that anyone seeking to create accessible
websites for autistic users follow the AASPIRE Web Accessibility Guidelines, in addition to
broader web and communications standards and principles such as the WCAG.
Physical Accessibility
• Provide a least one low-contrast, neutral-color palette option to accommodate sensitive
vision.
• Provide a selection of color palettes, including one with a dark background and one with
a light background, to accommodate color and contrast sensitivity.
• Provide a no-style option (i.e., no CSS), to accommodate browser customization and
users who prefer no stylistic formatting.
• Provide simple, consistent navigation and highly consistent site behavior for increased
ease of operation.
• Avoid textured backgrounds, moving images, decorative elements that do not convey
information, and other visual or sonic "clutter;" these types of elements may make the
site difficult or impossible to comprehend.
• Provide smaller font sizes in addition to larger ones; large font sizes may make the page
appear cluttered and difficult to read.
• Use a plain, accessible font such as a sans-serif font (e.g., Arial), for ease of readability.
Intellectual Accessibility
• Use the simplest interface possible, for ease of understanding.
• Use simple, concrete icons or images to communicate redundant information with text,
and accommodate multiple ways of understanding information.
• Clearly label site elements with their purpose throughout the site, even if it seems
redundant, to make navigation and site functionality easier to follow.


•
•
•

•

Provide concrete examples where applicable, to accommodate difficulties
understanding abstractions or generalizations.
Minimize scrolling, so that the user does not need to rely on assumptions about content
to guess what might be on the page.
Show all important features and site navigation, as opposed to within combo-box dropdown areas, so the user does not need to rely on assumptions to guess whether the
item exists, and how to access it. For example, completely visible list boxes or radio
buttons can be used instead of drop-down combo-boxes.
Make content as concise as possible without sacrificing precision and specificity, to
reduce cognitive burden.

Social Accessibility
• Be specific and precise in language; avoid colloquialisms, idioms, and ambiguity, to
accommodate difficulties with language pragmatics.
• Explain the reason behind any non-standard instructions or unusual information;
provide additional pragmatic context to accommodate difficulties with language
pragmatics.
• Provide alternatives to definitive response items on surveys and forms, such as, "do not
know," "do not wish to say," or "not applicable," to reduce frustration over not being
able to produce an exact answer.
• Use FAQ formats to organize complex information to enhance clarity as to why the
information might be useful to the user and how it connects to their life.
• Define terms that might have different meanings depending on social context, or that
might be jargon related to a specialized field (e.g., "drug interactions", "healthcare
providers"), to accommodate difficulties with language pragmatics.
• Attend to Autistic culture and community preferences, including the language used to
describe autism, and how community-based symbols and history might influence
content and perception of site credibility
Discussion
We present a systematically derived, theoretically grounded, empirically tested set of
guidelines for web accessibility for end users on the autism spectrum. These guidelines were
created via AASPIRE's collective expertise and our iterative engagement with end users on the
autism spectrum. The guidelines add to the growing literature of disability-specific accessibility
recommendations that go beyond what the WCAG supports, and cover all three dimensions of
accessibility: physical, intellectual, and social.
A small number of unofficial Web accessibility guidelines or recommendations for people on
the autistic spectrum do exist. However, they do not have our strong combination of autistic
end-user engagement in all phases, systematic guidelines generation, empirical testing, explicit
grounding in accessibility theory, and holistic approach. For example, both the National Autistic
Society and the UK Home Office have guidelines available outside the peer-reviewed


literature.52,53 An article from the proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions reviewed and compiled recommendations for
autism-specific guidelines scattered throughout the peer-reviewed literature.54 The compiled
list, arranged in categories, includes a number of the items identified in our work (e.g.,
customization and simplicity), further confirming our findings. However, it focuses on physical
accessibility and does not catch, for example, the importance of cultural considerations or the
cognitive impact of navigational scrolling. Other guidelines also focus on a particular area of
accessibility such as text and readability55 rather than the Web as a whole, or do not present
results of empirical testing.
This work has some limitations. First, the guidelines were generated from work on a primarily
informational website with a simple form-based application. Additional items may be needed
for websites with more complex or specialized functionality. Second, the work was done in the
United States and, although the technology of the internet is international, cultural and
technological considerations in localization (e.g., assumptions about available internet speed)
outside the U.S. were not considered. Third, the empirical findings from the final evaluation are
from a convenience sample of a study with a primary purpose to evaluate the potential impact
of the Toolkit on healthcare outcomes, rather than a primary focus on usability. Lastly, both our
CBPR team and our participant samples were primarily non-Hispanic white, leaving out key
racial and ethnic dimensions of diversity. Future work should address some of these gaps.
Due to an affinity for the Web among many autistic people, there may be significant impact
from increasing accessibility for the autistic population by using the AASPIRE Web Accessibility
Guidelines. We strongly support the implementation of accessible web sites for all people;
implementing these accessibility recommendations could improve access to information and
technology for the 1% of the adult population on the autism spectrum56—and the 1 in 59 of
young people on the autism spectrum who will become adults57—as well as to others who may
not be autistic but who have similar or overlapping accessibility needs (e.g., attention deficit
disorder/attention deficit hyperactive disorder, psychosis, or traumatic brain injury). We also
strongly recommend engaging the assistance of autistic web users directly as subject-matter
experts in website development. Accessibility matters and has real impact on reducing the
significant inequities experienced by adults with disabilities.
Acknowledgements:
We would like to thank the study participants and all AASPIRE team members, past and
present, for their invaluable insights. We would also like to thank the Autistic Self Advocacy
Network and the Autism Society of Oregon their help with recruitment and dissemination, and
for their ongoing support of our work.
This work was supported by National Institute of Mental Health grant number R34MH092503
and Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Institute (OCTRI) grant number UL1 RR024140
from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), a component of the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), and NIH Roadmap for Medical Research. Dr. Weiner is Chief of Health


Services Research and Development at the Richard L. Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical
Center in Indianapolis, Indiana. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or the NIH.
TABLES
Web Site Usability Study
Autistic
Supporter
PCP

3
3
2

Age

18-34
35-50
50+

2
2
4

Gender

Male
Female

2
6

Education

HS or modified
diploma
undergraduate
degree
graduate degree

2
3
3

Technical
Ability
(observed)

Low
Medium
High

3
3
3

Stakeholder
Group

Table 1: Usability Demographics
# of
severissue
reports ity
1
high
not clear site is about autism
overwhelming and not clear what
1
high
would be relevant (PCP side)
3

high

topic and outline links not clear

3

high

topics not clear

1

med

1

med

1

med

1

med

1

med

3

low

did not process right hand side of
main page where AHAT link is
not clear site is about primary care
only
font size adjuster hard to read for
someone with low vision
printed PDFs lack navigation and
branding
close window button only relevant
in the popup print version
slight crowding / narrow margins

actions
add some identifiers
re-do the information
architecture for the PCP side
add "Topics" or "Outline" header
above the links
change default to splash page to
description of topics
add AHAT link also to topic list
on left hand side
add some identifiers
make high contrast always
add table of contents and
branded footer to PDFs
hide close window button when
"No CSS" used as theme
make whitespace a little bigger,
bullet links

stakeholders**
pcp
pcp
aut
aut, sup
aut
sup
n/a
aut
aut
aut, pcp


thought a special "tool" area on
aut
the top bar might work
add static links to bottom in
aut, sup
3
low
addition to top
pcp
change graphic to plain text;
aut, sup,
5
low
consider other ideas
pcp
place dropdown in same place
5
low
as on formatted layout
aut, sup
add PDF indicator, link to
insufficient PDF identification and
1
low
Acrobat, information for how to
resources
get alternative format
aut
offer email option in a special
1*
low
looked for email to on main page
aut
content area on the main page
1
low
not sure what "No CSS" meant
change to "no layout"
aut
* italicized items not addressed due to determination of limited benefit given the effort to
implement effectively
** pcp - primary care provider; aut - autistic adult; sup - person who supports an autistic adult in
healthcare settings
1*

low

could not find detail actions (print,
email, download)
looked for static content links on
bottom of page
graphic for switching sides not
effective; unclear what it will do
dropdown to change back to layout
hard to find on no css theme

Table 2: Usability Matrix
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

Biever C. Web removes social barriers for those with autism. New Scientist.
2007(2610):26 - 27.
Jordan C. Evolution of autism support and understanding via the world wide web.
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities. 2010;48(3):220-227.
Robertson S. Information technology & the autistic culture: Influences, empowerment,
& progression of it usage in advocacy initiatives. Autreat; 2007; Johnstown,
Pennsylvania.
Chamak B, Bonniau B, Jaunay E, Cohen D. What Can We Learn about Autism from
Autistic Persons? Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics. 2008;77(5):271-279.
Sinclair J. History of ANI. 2005; http://www.autreat.com/History_of_ANI.html. Accessed
2 January, 2014.
Blume H. Autistics, freed from face-to-face encounters, are communicating in
cyberspace. The New York Times1997.
Gillespie-Lynch K, Kapp, Steven K., Shane-Simpson, C., Smith, D.S., Hutman, T.
Intersections between the autism spectrum and the Internet: Perceived benefits and
preferred functions of computer-mediated communication. Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities. 2014;52(6):456-469.
United States Government. Section 508. 2013; https://www.section508.gov/. Accessed
25 May, 2013.


9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

United Nations. Making web sites accessible for the Unitied Nations. 2013;
http://www.un.org/webaccessibility/index.shtml. Accessed 5/25, 2013.
W3C. Web Accessiblity Initiative (WAI). 2013; http://www.w3.org/WAI/. Accessed 5/25,
2013.
Jaeger PT. Disability and the Internet: Confronting a Digital Divide. Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner Pub; 2011.
W3C Web Accessibility Initiative. Cognitive and Learning Disabities Accessibility Task
Force (Cognitive A11Y TF). 2018; https://www.w3.org/WAI/PF/cognitive-a11y-tf/.
Accessed 26 March, 2018.
W3C Cognitive and Learning Disabilities Accessibility Task Force. Gap Analysis/autism.
2014; https://www.w3.org/WAI/PF/cognitive-a11y-tf/wiki/Gap_Analysis/autism.
Accessed 26 March, 2018.
Brajnik G, Yesilada Y, Harper S. The expertise effect on web accessibility evaluation
methods. Human–Computer Interaction. 2011;26(3):246-283.
Federici S, Micangeli A, Ruspantini I, et al. Checking an integrated model of web
accessibility and usability evaluation for disabled people. Disability and rehabilitation.
2005;27(13):781-790.
Kelly B, Sloan D, Brown S, et al. Accessibility 2.0: Next steps for web accessibility. Journal
of Access Services. 2009;6(1 & 2):265-294.
Mirchandani N. Web accessibility for people with cognitive disabilities: Universal design
principles at work! Research Exchange 2003; Vol.8,
No.3:http://www.ncddr.org/products/researchexchange/v08n03/8_access.html.
Accessed 27 September, 2013.
Adam A, Kreps D. Disability and discourses of web accessiblity. Information,
Communication & Society. 2009;12(7):1041-1058.
Friedman MG, Bryen DN. Web accessibility design recommendations for people with
cognitive disabilities. Technology and Disability. 2007;19(4):205-212.
Kennedy H, Evans S, Thomas S. Can the Web Be Made Accessible for People with
Intellectual Disabilities? The Information Society. 2011;27(1):29-39.
Jaeger PT. User-centered policy evaluations of Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act.
Journal of Disability Policy Studies. 2008;19(1):24-33.
McDonald KE, Keys CB. How the powerful decide: Access to research participation by
those at the margins. American Journal of Community Psychology. 2008;42(1):79-93.
McDonald KE. "We want respect": adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities
address respect in research. American journal on intellectual and developmental
disabilities. 2012;117(4):263-274.
McDonald KE, Kidney CA, Nelms SL, Parker MR, Kimmel A, Keys CB. Including adults with
intellectual disabilities in research: Scientists' perceptions of risks and protections.
Journal of Policy and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities. 2009;6(4):244-252.
Raymaker DM, McDonald KE. Paradigm shifts in disability and health: Toward more
ethical public health research. American journal of public health. 2013;103(12):21652173.


26.
27.
28.

29.
30.

31.
32.
33.

34.
35.

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

Brew-Parrish V. The wrong message. Awareness Days 1997; disability simulation issues.
Available at: http://www.raggededgemagazine.com/archive/aware.htm. Accessed 16
November, 2013.
Brew-Parrish V. The wrong message still. 2004; disability simulation issues. Available at:
http://www.raggededgemagazine.com/focus/wrongmessage04.html. Accessed 16
November, 2013.
Nicolaidis C, Raymaker DM, Katz M, et al. Participatory research to adapt measures of
health and interpersonal violence for use by people with developmental disabilities.
Progress in Community Health Partnerships: Research, Education, and Action. 2014;in
press.
Raymaker DM. Unpublished database and notes on Partnering ACASI usability study.
2011.
Nicolaidis C, Raymaker, D.M., McDonald, K., Kapp, S., Weiner, M., Ashkenazy, E., Gerrity,
M., Kripke, C., Platt, L. Baggs, A. The development and evaluation of an online
healthcare toolkit for autistic adults and their providers. Journal of General Internal
Medicine. 2016.
Nicolaidis C, Raymaker DM, Ashkenazy E, et al. "Respect the way I need to communicate
with you": Healthcare experiences of adults on the autism spectrum. Autism. 2015.
Raymaker DM, McDonald KE, Ashkenazy E, et al. Barriers to healthcare: Instrument
development and comparison between autistic adults and adults with and without
other disabilities. Autism. 2017;21(8):972-984.
Oschwald M, Renker PR, Hughes RB, Arthur A, Powers LE, Curry MA. Development of an
accessible audio computer-assisted self-interview (A-CASI) to screen for abuse and
provide safety strategies for women with disabilities. J Interpers Violence.
2009;24(5):795-818.
Oschwald M, Leotti S, Raymaker DM, et al. Development of an Audio-Computer Assisted
Self-Interview to investigate violence and health in the lives of people with
developmental disabilities. Disability and Health Journal. 2014.
Autisticalex. Why you need to stop using the puzzle piece to represent autistic people.
Autistic Alex: Blogging about neurodiversity, psychology, and autism research. Vol 2018.
https://autisticalex.wordpress.com/2014/04/12/why-you-need-to-stop-using-thepuzzle-piece-to-represent-autistic-people/2014.
Gernsbacher MA, Raimond AR, Stevenson JL, Boston JS, Harp B. Do puzzle pieces and
autism puzzle piece logos evoke negative associations? Autism. 2018;22(2):118-125.
W3C. Introduction to understanding WCAG 2.0. 2013;
http://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/intro.html - introductionfourprincs-head. Accessed 16 November, 2013.
W3C. Web content accessiblity guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. 2008;
http://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/intro.html - introductionfourprincs-head. Accessed 16 November, 2013.
Center for Plain Language. What is plain language? 2013;
http://centerforplainlanguage.org/. Accessed 10 October, 2013.
Israel BA, Schulz AJ, Parker EA, Becker AB, Allen AJI, Guzman JR. Critical issues in
developing and following community based participatory research principles. In:


41.
42.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

53.
54.

Meridith Minkler NW, ed. Community-Based Participatory Research for Health. San
Fransisco, CA: John Wille & Sons, Inc.; 2003:53-73.
Nicolaidis C, Raymaker DM. Community based participatory research with communities
defined by race, ethnicity, and disability: Translating theory to practice. In: Bradbury H,
ed. The SAGE Handbook of Action Research: SAGE; 2015:in press.
Nicolaidis C, Raymaker, D., McDonald, K, Dern, S., Ashkenazy, E., Boisclair, W.C.,
Robertson, S, Baggs, A. Collaboration strategies in non-traditional CBPR partnerships:
Lessons from an academic-community partnership with autistic self-advocates. Progress
in Community Health Partnerships. 2011;5(2):143-150.
Raymaker DM. Intersections of Critical Systems Thinking and Community Based
Participatory Research: A Learning Organization Example with the Autistic Community.
Syst Pract Action Res. 2016;29(5):405-423.
Creal DL. The "disability of thinking" the "disabled" body: Course paper for ambiguous
bodies: Studies in contemporary sexuality, masters level English course (6994.06). 1999;
http://www.normemma.com/advocacy/artcreal.htm. Accessed October 4, 2012.
Giangreco M. "The stairs don't go anywhere!": A self-advocate's reflections on
specialized services and their impact on people with disabilities. Physical Disabilities:
Education and Related Service. 1996;14(2):1-12.
Ne'eman A. The future (and past) of autism advocacy, or why the ASA's magazine, The
Advocate, wouldn't publish this piece. Disability Studies Quarterly. 2010;30(1).
Ludlow AK, Taylor-Whiffen E, Wilkins AJ. Coloured filters enhance the visual perception
of social cues in children with autism spectrum disorders. ISRN Neurol.
2012;2012:298098.
Whitaker L, Jones CR, Wilkins AJ, Roberson D. Judging the Intensity of Emotional
Expression in Faces: the Effects of Colored Tints on Individuals With Autism Spectrum
Disorder. Autism Res. 2016;9(4):450-459.
US Department of Health and Human Services. Usability testing.
http://usability.gov/methods/test_refine/learnusa/index.html. Accessed 5 November,
2012.
Nielsen J. How many test users in a usability study? 2012;
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-many-test-users/. Accessed 19 November,
2018.
StataCorp LP. Stata: Data analysis and statistical software. 2013;
http://www.stata.com/. Accessed 15 November, 2013.
The National Autistic Society. Designing websites suitable for people with autism
spectrum disorders. 2013; http://www.autism.org.uk/working-with/leisure-andenvironments/designing-websites-suitable-for-people-with-autism-spectrumdisorders.aspx. Accessed 16 November, 2013.
UK Home Office. Designing for accessibility: An update on our accessiblity posters. 2016;
https://hodigital.blog.gov.uk/2016/12/28/designing-for-accessibility-an-update-on-ouraccessibility-posters/. Accessed 31 October, 2018.
Britto T, Pizzolato, E. Towards web accessiblity guidelines of interaction and interface
design for people with autism spectrum disorder. Paper presented at: International
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions2016; Venice, Italy.


55.
56.
57.

Pavlov N. User interface for people with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Software
Engineeering and Applications. 2014;7(2):128-134.
Brugha T, Meltzer H, Smith J, et al. Autism spectrum disorders in adults living in
households throughout England: Report from the adult psychiatric morbidity survey
2007. Information Center for Health and Social Care;2009.
Baio J, Wiggins L, Christensen DL, et al. Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among
Children Aged 8 Years - Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11
Sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2018;67(6):1-23.
